[ spi_host, doc ] Update spi_host documentation (#7135)
lowRISC/opentitan: hw/ip/spi_host/doc/_index.md

- Primarily designed for serial NOR flash devices such as the [Winbond W25Q01JV](https://www.winbond.com/resource-files/W25Q01JV%20SPI%20RevB%2011132019.pdf)
- Number of chip select lines controlled by `MaxCS` parameter
- Support for Standard SPI, Dual SPI or Quad SPI commands

>   - Pins `cio_sd[0]` through `cio_sd[3]` are intended to connect to lines IO<sub>0</sub> through IO<sub>3</sub> respectively, on the target device.

Author: Good point.  Will do.

>   - Pins `cio_sd[0]` through `cio_sd[3]` are intended to connect to lines IO<sub>0</sub> through IO<sub>3</sub> respectively, on the target device.

Reviewer: Alternatively, don't use the `cio_` prefix (chip I/O) in the documentation. This usage is consistent with what we do in UART (https://docs.opentitan.org/hw/ip/uart/doc/#design-details). No preference from my side either way, however.

>   - Pins `cio_sd[0]` through `cio_sd[3]` are intended to connect to lines IO<sub>0</sub> through IO<sub>3</sub> respectively, on the target device.

Author: Ah thanks for the tip Philipp.  I'll standardize on one way.

>   - Pins `cio_sd[0]` through `cio_sd[3]` are intended to connect to lines IO<sub>0</sub> through IO<sub>3</sub> respectively, on the target device.

Author: Interestingly enough it seems that generally, when talking about external buses the signal name
- Does not include `cio_`
- Is all caps
- Is not fixed-width

>   - Pins `cio_sd[0]` through `cio_sd[3]` are intended to connect to lines IO<sub>0</sub> through IO<sub>3</sub> respectively, on the target device.

Author: Latest commit standardizes on *not* using `cio_` prefix for these external signals.

This half-duplex signaling behavior is especially common in devices with also support Dual- and Quad-mode commands, which are always half-duplex.
The SPI_HOST IP optionally supports both full-duplex and half-duplex commands in standard mode.

Along with the data lines, the SPI protocol also includes a chip select line, commonly called CS\#, or in this IP we refer to it as `csb`.
The SPI bus can be connected to many target peripherals, but each device on the bus gets its own chip select line, and so this active-low signal designates a particular device for each command.

The chip-select line also marks the beginning and end of each command.
No device will accept any command input until `csb` has been asserted for that device, and most devices (if not all) do not accept a second command unless `csb` has been deasserted to mark the end of the previous command.
Some simple devices, particularly those that support SPI daisy-chaining, do not process command input at all until *after* the `csb` line has been deasserted.
In the case of NOR flash devices, read and write commands are indeterminate in length, and the data transfer ends only when the `csb` line is deasserted.

> So, though the exact details of operation may vary from device to device, the edges of the `csb` signal serve as an important markers for delineating the boundaries of each transaction.

Author: Does this work with "edges" as a subject?

  {name: "clk_core_i", wave: "p.................."},
  {name: "sck (CPOL=0)", wave: "0.1010101010101010."},
  {name: "sck (CPOL=1)", wave: "1.0101010101010101."},
  {name: "csb", wave: "10................1"},
  ["CPHA = 0",
    {name: "sd[0] (output)", wave: "22.2.2.2.2.2.2.2...", data: ["","out7", "out6", "out5", "out4", "out3", "out2", "out1", "out0" ]},

>     {name: "sd[1] (input)", wave: "22.2.2.2.2.2.2.2.2.", data: ["","in7", "in6", "in5", "in4", "in3", "in2", "in1", "in0",""]},

Author: Standardized on *not* using `cio_` prefix for these external signals.

# Theory of Operations

## SPI_HOST IP Command Interface

> Any particular SPI command can be thought of one or more *segments*, each with different speed (number of active `sd` lines), direction and length.

Author: I like the latter. Thanks!

For example a quad SPI read transaction consists of 4 segments:
1. A single byte instruction transmitted at *standard* data rate
2. A three or four byte address transmitted at *quad* data rate
3. A number of dummy cycles (no data transmitted or received)

> 4. The desired data, received by `spi_host` at *quad* data rate.

Author: ```suggestion
4. The desired data, received by `spi_host` at *Quad* data rate
```

During any transaction, software can issue multiple segment descriptions to the `SPI_HOST` IP to control for changes in speed or direction. 

Issuing a command then consists of the following steps:
1. Configure the IP to be compatible with each attached peripheral.
The {{< regref "CONFIGOPTS_0" >}} multi-register holds separate sets configuration settings, one for each `csb` line.

> In principle configuration of these device-specific options only needs to be once at initialization.

Author: Got it.  Thanks!

2. Load the TX FIFO with the instructions and data to be transmitted to the remote device by writing to the {{< regref "DATA" >}} memory window.
3. Specify which device should receive the next command using the {{< regref "CSID" >}} register.
4. Wait for {{< regref "STATUS.READY" >}} before continuing.
5. Issue speed, direction, and length details for the next command segment using the {{< regref "COMMAND" >}} register.

> If a command consists of multiple segments, then leave {{< regref "COMMAND.CSAAT" >}} (Chip-select active after transaction) for all segments except the last one.

Author: Got it. Thanks!

Setting {{< regref "COMMAND.CSAAT" >}} to 0 indicates the end of a transaction, prompting the IP to raise `csb` at the end of the segment. 
6. Repeat steps 4 and 5 until all segments have been described.
7. Read any peripheral response data from the RX FIFO by reading from the {{< regref "DATA" >}} memory window.

### About Command Segments

> The structure of a SPI command varies from device-to-device and from command-to-command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The structure of an SPI command varies from device to device and from command to command.
```

Or: "The structure of an SPI command depends on the device and the command itself."

Author: Oh, interesting.  I wonder how many people commonly pronounce it "ess-pee-eye" vs. "spy".   I also wonder what the right thing to assume is here.

> To support a variety of different I/O sequences the SPI_HOST FSM treats each command as a sequence of segments such each with a defined length, direction and speed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To support a variety of different I/O sequences the SPI_HOST FSM treats each command as a sequence of segments, each with a defined length, direction and speed.
```

> Starting with the simplest case of standard SPI devices, these commands for these devices are very consistent in structure: the host transmits data on `sd[0]`, and always receives data on `sd[1]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case of a standard SPI device the commands are very consistent in structure: the host transmits data on `cio_sd[0]`, and always receives data on `cio_sd[1]`.
```

For such devices, all commands can in principle be treated as bidirectional, as both the host and device are always transmitting on their respective lines.
For bidirectional commands, the SPI_HOST IP will store one byte in the RX FIFO for each byte transmitted from the TX FIFO.

> However, even for these standard SPI commands, software may be uninterested in some or all of the device response data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, even for these standard SPI commands, software may be uninterested in some or all of the device's response data.
```

? (Not sure.)

For example, for SPI flash devices, standard-mode write commands contain no useful data in the device response, even though the device may be actively asserting signals to `sd[1]` throughout the transaction.

> Therefore, for such commands software may choose to specify the entire command as "Tx Only", in which case data placed in the TX FIFO will be transmitted throughout the write command, but signals received from the device will be ignored and will not fill the RX FIFO.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, for such commands software may choose to specify the entire command as "TX Only", in which case data placed in the TX FIFO will be transmitted throughout the write command, but signals received from the device will be ignored and will not fill the RX FIFO.
```

Meanwhile for other flash commands, such as standard-mode read, the device only transmits useful information during some portions of the transaction.
In the case of a basic read (with a 3-byte address), the instruction starts with a 1-byte instruction code (0x3) followed by the three address bytes, during which time the flash device outputs may be high impedance (depending on the device).
The device then immediately responds with the requested data in the next `sck` cycle, and continues to output data bytes until the `csb` line is deasserted.

> Though such a command could also be treated as entirely bidirectional, the device response can be safely ignored during the instruction and address phase (especially if the sd[1] line is high impedance during this time). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Though such a command could also be treated as entirely bidirectional, the device response can be safely ignored during the instruction and address phase, especially if the `sd[1]` line is high impedance during this time.
```

Likewise it is not necessary for software to specify any data to transmit while the device is responding.

> Therefore such a command can be thought of as consisting of two separate segments, the first segment being TX Only and the second segment being Rx only, as shown in the following figure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore such a command can be thought of as consisting of two separate segments, the first segment being TX Only and the second segment being RX only, as shown in the following figure.
```

Breaking the command up this way potentially simplifies the job of writing software for this type of command.

{{< wavejson >}}
{signal: [
  {name: "clk_core_i",     wave: "p....................|.............."},
  {name: "sck (CPOL=0)",   wave: "0.1010101010101010101|01010101010101"},
  {name: "csb",            wave: "10...................|.............."},
  {name: "sd[0]",          wave: "00.0.0.0.0.0.1.1.2.2.|2.2.x.........", data: ["a[23]", "a[22]", "a[1]", "a[0]"]},
  {name: "sd[1]",          wave: "z....................|....2.2.2.2.2.", data: ["d[7]", "d[6]", "d[5]", "d[4]", "..."]},
  {name: "Segment number", wave: "x2...................|....2.........", data: ['1', '2', '3','4'] },
  {name: "Segment speed",  wave: "x2...................|....2.........", data: ['Standard', 'Standard'] },

>   {name: "Segment Direction", wave: "x2...................|....2.........", data: ['TX', 'RX', 'None', 'RX'] },

Reviewer: Direction -> direction (for consistency with other names above)? (Here and in other waveforms as well.)

Author: Ah! good catch. Thanks.

  ],

>  foot: {text: "Standard SPI Example: Read command with 24-bit address, consisting of one TX and one RX segment"}

Reviewer: Maybe mention "flash" in this caption somewhere to make it clear we're talking about the flash case presented before?

Author: ```suggestion
 foot: {text: "Standard SPI Example: Flash Read command with 24-bit address, consisting of one TX and one RX segment"}
```

}
{{< /wavejson >}}

In addition to the TX, RX or Bidirectional modes, many SPI commands require periods where neither the host or device are transmitting data.
For instance, many flash devices define a Fast Read command in which the host must insert a number of "dummy clocks" between the last address byte and the first data byte from the device.
These extra cycles are required for operation at higher clock frequencies, to give the address time to propagate through the flash core. 
A standard-mode Fast Read (with 3 byte addressing) command then requires *three* SPI_HOST command segments:

> - 4 bytes TX Only, one for the instruction code, (i.e., 0xb for Fast Read), and three for the address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 4 bytes TX Only: one for the instruction code (i.e., 0xb for Fast Read), and three for the address.
```

  {name: "sck (CPOL=0)",   wave: "0.1010101010101010101|010101010101010101010101010101"},
  {name: "csb",            wave: "10...................|.............................."},
  {name: "sd[0]",          wave: "00.0.0.0.1.0.1.1.2.2.|2.2.x.........................", data: ["a[23]", "a[22]", "a[1]", "a[0]"]},
  {name: "sd[1]",          wave: "z....................|....z.z.z.z.z.z.z.z.2.2.2.2.2.", data: ["d[7]", "d[6]", "d[5]", "d[4]", "..."]},
  {name: "Segment number", wave: "x3...................|....4...............5.........", data: ['1', '2', '3'] },
  {name: "Segment speed",  wave: "x3...................|....4...............5.........", data: ['Standard', 'X', 'Standard'] },
  {name: "Segment Direction", wave: "x3...................|....4...............5.........", data: ['TX', 'Dummy', 'RX'] },
  ],
 foot: {text: "Standard SPI Example: Fast read command (instruction code 0xb) with 24-bit address, consisting of three segments, one TX, 8 dummy clocks and one RX segment"}
}
{{< /wavejson >}}

For standard mode-commands, segments simplify the IO process by identifying which bus cycles have useful RX or TX data.

> In such cases it is not strictly necessary to the manage the impedance for the `sd[0]` and `sd[1]` lines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In such cases it is not strictly necessary to the manage the impedance of the `sd[0]` and `sd[1]` lines.
```

> For Dual- or Quad-mode commands, however, impedance control is far more important as the impedance for all data lines, `cio_sd[3:0]`, has to dynamically switch between TX and RX segments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Dual- and Quad-mode commands, however, impedance control necessary.
The impedance of all data lines (`cio_sd[3:0]`) has to dynamically switch between TX and RX segments.
```

What do you mean by "dynamically switched"? "dynamic switching" seems already redundant, but it's probably best to slightly rephrase this sentence.

Author: This is probably better, I agree.

> Bidirectional data transfers are not applicable for Dual- or Quad- mode segments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bidirectional data transfers are not applicable for Dual- or Quad-mode segments.
```

> In addition, the speed-mode changes how data is distributed across the four data lines, and many commands require that some segments are transmitted in standard mode (just on `sd[0]`), while the bulk of the data is transmitted in dual- or quad-mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, the speed-mode changes how data is distributed across the four data lines, and many commands require that some segments are transmitted in standard mode (only on `sd[0]`), while the bulk of the data is transmitted in Dual- or Quad-mode.
```

For this reason the speed-mode is also adjustable on a segment-by-segment basis.

#### Specifying Command Segments

> The SPI host then supports all four possible modes for command segments, and they are controlled writing one of the following values to the 2-bit {{< regref "COMMAND.DIRECTION" >}} register:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SPI host supports all four possible modes for command segments, and they are controlled writing one of the following values to the 2-bit {{< regref "COMMAND.DIRECTION" >}} register:
```

- 2'b00: Dummy cycles only (neither side transmits)
- 2'b01: RX Only
- 2'b10: TX Only
- 2'b11: Bidirectional

### CSID Register

> 

Author: Hmm, that seems to be an oversight.  I definitely wanted that in this PR.

> 

Author: This section is filled in, in the latest commit.

#### Chip-select timing control

Typically the `csb` line is automatically deasserted after the last edge of `sck`.
However,  by asserting {{< regref "CONFIGOPTS_0.CSAAT_0" >}} before issuing a particular command, one can instruct the core to hold `csb` low indefinitely after the last clock edge.
This is useful for merging two adjacent commands together, to create very long commands such as continuous read operations.

> The `csb` line can then be deasserted by either issuing another command after clearing the {{< regref "CONFIGOPTS_0.CSAAT_0" >}} field, issuing a command to a different device (using a different `COMMAND` register), or simply resetting the core FSM via the {{< regref "CONTROL.RST_FSM">}} register.

Author: The point here is that one could in principle do indefinite reads.  This might not be really that useful for flash (as the software presumably knows how much data it needs), but other devices could really benefit from this.   Also for very long reads the size of a desired read could go beyond the maximum 511 bytes supported.   In which case you'd need to do some stitching.

> The `csb` line can then be deasserted by either issuing another command after clearing the {{< regref "CONFIGOPTS_0.CSAAT_0" >}} field, issuing a command to a different device (using a different `COMMAND` register), or simply resetting the core FSM via the {{< regref "CONTROL.RST_FSM">}} register.

Reviewer 2: ah - ok that makes sense then

### Special Command Fields

The {{< regref "COMMAND" >}} register must be written every time a command is issued.
Whenever a command segment is written to {{< regref "COMMAND" >}}, the contents of the {{< regref "CONFIGOPTS_0" >}} and {{< regref "COMMAND" >}} registers are passed through the Config/Command CDC to the SPI_HOST core FSM, along with a Chip Select mask signal, indicating which device should receive the command (for example `csb[0]`)
Once the command is issued, the core will immediately deassert {{< regref "STATUS.READY" >}}, and once the command has started {{< regref "STATUS.ACTIVE" >}} will go high.
The {{< regref "STATUS.ACTIVE" >}} line takes a few cycles to assert, due to CDC delays.
The command is complete when {{< regref "STATUS.ACTIVE" >}} goes low.
A `spi_event` interrupt can also be triggered to go off on completion by setting {{< regref "EVENT_ENABLE.IDLE" >}}.

### Chip Select Masks

Each instance of the SPI_HOST IP supports a parametrizable number of chip select lines (`csb[MaxCS-1:0]`).
Each `csb` line can be routed either to a single peripheral or to a daisy-chain of peripherals.

> Whenever a segment description is written to the `GO` bits in the {{< regref "COMMAND">}} register, the  {{< regref "CSID" >}} is sent along with {{< regref "COMMAND" >}} and the `CONFIGOPTS` multi-register corresponding to {{< regref "CSID" >}}  to indicate which device is meant to receive the command.

Author: ```suggestion
Whenever a segment description is written to the {{< regref "COMMAND">}} register, the  {{< regref "CSID" >}} is sent along with {{< regref "COMMAND" >}} and the `CONFIGOPTS` multi-register corresponding to {{< regref "CSID" >}}  to indicate which device is meant to receive the command.
```

> The SPI_HOST core typically then manages the details of asserting and deasserting the proper `csb` line, subject to the timing parameters expressed in {{< regref "CONFIGOPTS_0.CSAAT_0" >}}, {{< regref "CONFIGOPTS_0.CSNLEAD_0" >}}, {{< regref "CONFIGOPTS_0.CSNTRAIL_0" >}}, and {{< regref "CONFIGOPTS_0.CSNIDLE_0" >}}.

Author: ```suggestion
The SPI_HOST core typically then manages the details of asserting and deasserting the proper `csb` line, subject to the timing parameters expressed in {{< regref "CONFIGOPTS_0.CSNLEAD_0" >}}, {{< regref "CONFIGOPTS_0.CSNTRAIL_0" >}}, and {{< regref "CONFIGOPTS_0.CSNIDLE_0" >}}.
```

### Back-to-back Segments

The command interface can allows for any number of segments in a given command. 

There is no command queue for submitting segments to the SPI_HOST IP.
However a second segment can be placed into the Config/Command CDC whenever {{< regref "STATUS.READY" >}} is high, even if the previous segment is still running.
The internal state within the Config/Command CDC provides the option of scheduling a second command segement to execute immediately after completion of the current segment.

On the other hand, writing a segment description to {{< regref "COMMAND" >}} when {{< regref "STATUS.READY" >}} is low will trigger an error condition, which must be acknowledged by software.

## Data Formatting

### Input and Output Byte Ordering

The SPI transactions must be issued with correct bit ordering to properly communicate with a remote device.
Based on the requirements for our chosen flash devices, this IP follows these conventions:
- The relative significance of lines on the `sd` bus: `sd[0]` is always the least significant, followed by `sd[1]` though `sd[3]` with increasing significance.

> - The relative significance of a sequence of bits on the same `sd` bus: higher significance bits are always transmitted earlier than (or at the same time as) any lower significance bits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The relative significance of a sequence of bits on the same `sd` bus: more significant bits are always transmitted before (or at the same time as) less significant bits.
```

    - For instance, when transferring a single byte in Quad mode, all four bits of the upper nibble (bits 7 through 3) are transferred in the first clock cycle and the entire lower nibble (bits 3 through 0) is transferred in the second cycle.

The programming model for the IP should meanwhile make it easy to quickly program the peripheral device, with a minimum amount of byte shuffling.
It should be intuitive to program the specific flash devices we are targeting, while following the conventions above:

> - When reading the data in and out of the {{< regref "DATA" >}} memory window, the IP should make the most of the TL-UL bus, using 32-bit I/O instructions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When reading the data in and out of the {{< regref "DATA" >}} memory window, the IP should fully utilize the TL-UL bus, using 32-bit I/O instructions.
```

> - The SPI_HOST should make it easy to arrange transaction-data in processor memory, meaning that bytes should be sequentially transmitted in order of ascending memory address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The SPI_HOST should make it easy to arrange transaction data in processor memory, meaning that bytes should be sequentially transmitted in order of ascending memory address.
```

  - When using 32-bit I/O instructions, this requires some knowledge of the processor byte-order.

Based on these requirements, data placed in or read from {{< regref "DATA" >}} are handled as follows:
- 32-bit words placed in {{< regref "DATA" >}} are transmitted in first-in-first-out order.
Likewise, words received from the SPI data lines are made available for reading from in {{< regref "DATA" >}} in first-in-first-out order.

> - Within a 32-byte word, the `ByteOrder` parameter controls the order in which bytes are transmitted, and also the manner in which received bytes are eventually arranged in the 32-bit {{< regref "RXDATA" >}} register.

Reviewer: 32 byte?

Author: ```suggestion
- Within a 32-bit word, the `ByteOrder` parameter controls the order in which bytes are transmitted, and also the manner in which received bytes are eventually arranged in the 32-bit {{< regref "RXDATA" >}} register.
```

  {name: "sd[3]", wave: "x...22334455x...", data: ["d[31]", "d[27]", "d[23]", "d[19]", "d[15]", "d[11]", "d[7]", "d[3]"]},
],
   ["ByteOrder=1",
  {name: "sd[0]", wave: "x...55443322x...", data: ["d[4]", "d[0]", "d[12]", "d[8]", "d[20]", "d[16]", "d[28]", "d[24]"]},
  {name: "sd[1]", wave: "x...55443322x...", data: ["d[5]", "d[1]", "d[13]", "d[9]", "d[21]", "d[17]", "d[29]", "d[25]"]},
  {name: "sd[2]", wave: "x...55443322x...", data: ["d[6]", "d[2]", "d[14]", "d[10]", "d[22]", "d[18]", "d[30]", "d[26]"]},
  {name: "sd[3]", wave: "x...55443322x...", data: ["d[7]", "d[3]", "d[15]", "d[11]", "d[23]", "d[19]", "d[31]", "d[27]"]},
  ],
  ],
  head: {
   text: "Serial bit ordering for 32-bit data word (d[31:0]), Quad SPI as a Function of the Parameter 'ByteOrder'",
  },
  foot: {
  text: "(Bits are numbered as they appear when loaded into DATA memory window)"
  }
}
{{< /wavejson >}}

### Command Length and Alignment in DATA

Even though the {{< regref "DATA" >}} memory window typically accepts 32-bit words, command segments do not need to use all the bytes from every word. 

> For TX (or Bidirectional) segments, any unused bytes from the latest TX FIFO word are simply ignored at the end of a segment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For TX (or Bidirectional) segments, unused bytes from the latest TX FIFO word are simply ignored at the end of a segment.
```

> For RX (or Bidirectional) segments, if the last few received bytes do not fill an entire DATA word, the partial word will be zero-padded and inserted into the RX FIFO once the segment is completed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For RX (or Bidirectional) segments, if the last few received bytes (?) do not fill an entire DATA word, the partial word will be zero-padded and inserted into the RX FIFO once the segment is completed.
```

zero-padded where? 

And really bytes?

Author: Yes. Really bytes (3 or fewer). SPI does not support bit-level transactions (or at least I don't know any devices which do).

This sentence has been clarified as:
```
For RX (or Bidirectional) segments, if the last few bytes received do not fill an entire DATA word, the partial word will be zero-padded and inserted into the RX FIFO once the segment is completed.                                                                                                                       
If ByteOrder=1 (the default, Little-Endian case), this padding will fill the unused most-significant bytes of the final RX DATA word, otherwise the padding will fill the unused least-significant bytes.                                                                                                                   
```

  },
  foot: {
    text: "Command consists of 4 segments, all TX data is written to DATA using 32-bit memory instructions (all bytes enabled)"
  }
}
{{< /wavejson >}}

When packing data into the TX FIFO, there are also no restrictions on the alignment of the data written to the {{< regref "DATA" >}} memory window, as it supports byte-enable signals.
This means that when copying bytes into {{< regref "DATA" >}} from unaligned firmware memory addresses, it is possible to use byte or half-word instructions.
Full-word instructions should however be used whenever possible, because each write consumes a full word of data in the TX FIFO regardless of the instruction size.
Smaller writes will thus make inefficient use of the TX FIFO.

The RX FIFO has no special provisions for packing received data in any unaligned fashion.
Depending on the ByteOrder parameter, the first byte received is always packed into either the most- or least-significant byte read from the {{< regref "DATA" >}} memory window.

## Pass-through Mode

The SPI_HOST also supports a special "Pass-through" mode, which allows for the direct control of the serial interface by another block (namely SPI_DEVICE).

> This feature is entirely controlled by intermodule signals `passthrough_i` and `passthrough_o`, which control a set of multiplexors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature is entirely controlled by intermodule signals `passthrough_i` and `passthrough_o`, which control a set of multiplexers.
```

> If `passthrough_i.passthrough_en` is deasserted the SPI_HOST peripheral bus signals reflect the corresponding signals in the `passthrough_i` structure.

Author: ```suggestion
If `passthrough_i.passthrough_en` is asserted the SPI_HOST peripheral bus signals reflect the corresponding signals in the `passthrough_i` structure.
```

Most SPI events signal a particular condition that persists until it is fixed, and these conditions can be detected by polling the corresponding field in the {{< regref "STATUS" >}} register.

In addition to these events, there are also two additional diagnostic fields in the {{< regref "STATUS" >}} register:  

> - `RXSTALL`: The RXFIFO is full, and the SPI_HOST is stalled and waiting for firmware to remove some data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `RXSTALL`: The RX FIFO is full, and the SPI_HOST is stalled and waiting for firmware to remove some data.
```

## Status Indicators

The {{< regref "STATUS" >}} register contains a number of fields that should be queried for successful operation or troubleshooting.

The register {{< regref "STATUS.ACTIVE" >}} indicates whether a command segment is currently being processed by the FSM.
Even if {{< regref "STATUS.ACTIVE" >}} is high it is often still possible to insert another command segment into the CDC, allowing for the possibility of back-to-back processing of multiple segments.
So the register {{< regref "STATUS.READY" >}} indicates that there is room to submit another segment into {{< regref "COMMAND" >}}.

The {{< regref "STATUS.BYTEORDER" >}} field indicates the fixed value of the `ByteOrder` parameter, which is presented to software to confirm the byte ordering used in the {{< regref "DATA" >}} register.

The 8-bit fields {{< regref "STATUS.RXQD" >}} and {{< regref "STATUS.TXQD" >}} respectively indicate the number of words currently stored in the RX and TX FIFOs.

> The remaining fields in the {{< regref "STATUS" >}} register are all flags related to the management of the TX and RX FIFO's, which are described in the [section on SPI Events]({{< relref "#spi-events-and-event-interrupts" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The remaining fields in the {{< regref "STATUS" >}} register are all flags related to the management of the TX and RX FIFOs, which are described in the [section on SPI Events]({{< relref "#spi-events-and-event-interrupts" >}}).
```

### Component reset

In addition to the global hardware reset, there is a software reset option which completely resets the SPI host.

> To use this reset, simply assert {{< regref "CONTROL.SW_RST" >}}, and then wait for the device to reset ({{< regref "STATUS.ACTIVE" >}}, {{< regref "STATUS.TXQD" >}} and {{< regref "STATUS.RXQD" >}} to all go to zero), before releasing {{< regref "CONTROL.SW_RST" >}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use this reset, assert {{< regref "CONTROL.SW_RST" >}}, and then wait for the device to reset ({{< regref "STATUS.ACTIVE" >}}, {{< regref "STATUS.TXQD" >}} and {{< regref "STATUS.RXQD" >}} to all go to zero), before releasing {{< regref "CONTROL.SW_RST" >}}.
```

**Note when using Little-Endian systems (such as Ibex)**: 32-bit integer addresses must be byte-swapped to Big-Endian byte-order before being loaded into {{< regref "TXDATA" >}}, because these SPI flash devices expect the MSB to be sent first.
Assuming the SPI_HOST is compiled with `ByteOrder = 1`, sending the address without this byte swap will result in the MSB being sent last, and the address will be incorrectly received at the flash device.
The `ByteOrder` parameter is meant to correct for byte-ordering issues that may be caused when using 32-bit instructions to copy bytes from *memory* to the SPI bus (i.e. the goal is to avoid shuffling of flash data).
When copying 32-bit *CPU register* values, such as addresses, to {{< regref "TXDATA" >}} this byte-ordering correction (which is applied to properly order memory transfers) inverts the register address.

### Example 2: Quad Read with 3-byte Addressing

For 3-byte address commands, writing the 24-bit address to {{< regref "TXDATA" >}} as a 32-bit integer will *not* work.
The address will be sent as a 4-byte value, and the entire command will be shifted incorrectly.
There are two possible solutions to this problem:

> 1. The instruction code can be packed into the MSB of the address, and written to {{< regref "TXDATA" >}}, to create a 4-byte header which can be loaded directly into {{< regref "TXDATA">}}

Reviewer 2: would this not cause the Command to be transmitted in quad mode (i.e shifting the address out of position I don't think this is legal behavior) or the address to be transmitted in standard mode?
I think some waves would be great here to explain this?

Reviewer 2: could the byte enables not be used to align the data correctly?

Author: This whole final section appears to be out of date.  (Though I personally claim it is not needed for D1).   I'm in the progress of updating it, but for the time being I'll just cut it out of this PR.

Author: This section will be moved to another PR.   (Simply because I don't think these details are needed for D1).   Normally I would preserve this comment, but I think the text will change so much that it might be best requesting you take a fresh look in the next round.
